# BIOMD0000000504: MODEL1305280001

## Installation

Download this repository, and install with distutils

`python setup.py install`

Or, install using pip

`pip install git+https://github.com/biomodels/BIOMD0000000504.git`

To install a specific version (in this example, from the 2014-09-16 BioModels release)

`pip install git+https://github.com/biomodels/BIOMD0000000504.git@20140916`


# Model Notes


Proctor2013 - Cartilage breakdown, interventions to reduce collagen release

The molecular pathways involved in cartilage breakdown is studied using this
model to examine possible interventions to reduce cartilage collagen release.
The model contains three separate submodels, one which describes the IL-1/JNK
signalling pathway, secondly the OSM/STAT3 signalling pathway, and lastly a
module which includes proMMP (Matrix matalloproteinase) activation, and
aggrecan and collagen release.

This model is described in the article:

[A computer simulation approach for assessing therapeutic intervention points
to prevent cytokine-induced cartilage
breakdown.](http://identifiers.org/pubmed/24285357)

Proctor CJ, Macdonald C, Milner JM, Rowan AD, Cawston TE.

Arthritis Rheum. 2013 Nov 27.

Abstract:

Objective. To use a novel computational approach to examine the molecular
pathways involved in cartilage breakdown and to use computer simulation to
test possible interventions to reduce collagen release. Methods. We
constructed a computational model of the relevant molecular pathways using the
Systems Biology Markup Language (SBML), a computer-readable format of a
biochemical network. The model was constructed using our experimental data
showing that interleukin-1 (IL-1) and oncostatin M (OSM) act synergistically
to up-regulate collagenase protein and activity and initiate cartilage
collagen breakdown. Simulations were performed in the COPASI software package.
Results. The model predicted that simulated inhibition of c-Jun N-terminal
kinase (JNK) or p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase, and over-expression of
tissue inhibitor of metalloproteinases 3 (TIMP-3) led to a reduction in
collagen release. Over-expression of TIMP-1 was much less effective than
TIMP-3 and led to a delay, rather than a reduction, in collagen release.
Simulated interventions of receptor antagonists and inhibition of Janus kinase
1 (JAK1), the first kinase in the OSM pathway, were ineffective. So,
importantly, the model predicts that it is more effective to intervene at
targets which are downstream, such as the JNK pathway, rather than close to
the cytokine signal. In vitro experiments confirmed the effectiveness of JNK
inhibition. Conclusion. Our study shows the value of computer modelling as a
tool for examining possible interventions to reduce cartilage collagen
breakdown. The model predicts interventions that either prevent transcription
or inhibit activity of collagenases are promising strategies and should be
investigated further in an experimental setting. Â© 2013 American College of
Rheumatology.

This model is hosted on [BioModels Database](http://www.ebi.ac.uk/biomodels/)
and identified by:
[BIOMD0000000504](http://identifiers.org/biomodels.db/BIOMD0000000504) .

To cite BioModels Database, please use: [BioModels Database: An enhanced,
curated and annotated resource for published quantitative kinetic
models](http://identifiers.org/pubmed/20587024) .

To the extent possible under law, all copyright and related or neighbouring
rights to this encoded model have been dedicated to the public domain
worldwide. Please refer to [CC0 Public Domain
Dedication](http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/) for more
information.


